---
layout: post
title: Blogging Using Jekyll and Github Pages
category: en
---

{{ page.title }}
================

<p class="meta">28 December 2011 - Lisbon</p>

Introduction
------------

As you know there are lots of blogging engine out there (Wordpress, Blogger,
etc).  Several years ago I have used to blog on the Wordpress, then again on
Posterous; however, I never really liked them. There are lots of bloated things,
and if you want to change, for instance, a theme it is painful. You should learn
their theming system etc. Blogging should be as easy as firing up your favorite
text editor and writing on it. After doing some (re)search I came across several
posts about ["Blogging Like a Hacker"][tompreston].

Therefore, I gave it a try. If you like simple blogging and clean themes,
moreover, if you want full control over your blogging engine you are on the
right place.  In this post I will try to explain how to setup blogging engine
using [Jekyll](http://github.com/mojombo/jekyll) and [Github
Pages](http://pages.github.com/).

Blogging Engine in a Half an Hour
---------------------------------

A Lot of people use Github for code repository hosting, but you can also do
webhosting with your Github account. It is source controlled and free, after
pushing to a git repository you Github Page is deployed automatically. Your
static website is generated by Jekyll from plain text post files and layout
templates. After pushing new posts to Github, Jekyll is run on the files and the
static site is generated and hosted for you.  In order to setup all, I have
followed the [David Winter's Post][davidwinter] you can also look to that post
as well. (I have setup all these in my Ubuntu 11.10 machine, installing to Mac
and Windows should not be different.)

To get started, install rubygems (this is required in order to install Jekyll).

<pre class="terminal"><code>$ sudo apt-get install rubygems</code></pre>

Then install Jekyll

<pre class="terminal"><code>$ sudo gem install jekyll</code></pre>

Mostly posts are written in Markdown, Textile or plain html. I will be using
[Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/) so we need to install
rdiscount in order to use it.

<pre class="terminal"><code>$ sudo gem install rdiscount</code></pre>

Now let's create a git repository to manage your blog. You can setup all
configurations by yourself but, for the sake of simplicity, let's clone the bare
bones of the Jekyll base site.

```bash
> git clone https://github.com/danielmcgraw/Jekyll-Base.git yourgithubusername.github.com
```

Replace <code>yourgithubusername</code> with your Github username.

Now, we don't want the git history for this skeleton setup, so remove the .git
directory:

<pre class="terminal"><code>$ cd yourgithubusername.github.com/ $ rm -rf
.git</code></pre>

At this stage you should have working system, in order to test open another
terminal, go to the same directory and run Jekyll locally,

<pre class="terminal"><code>$ jekyll --server</code></pre>

(This might give some errors about specification file, in that case find that
file and remove the time from date written there).  This will run the webserver
on the port 4000, monitoring file changes and applying the changes automatically
on the fly. Therefore, keep this terminal open and runnning.

You should now be able to see the generated site locally by visiting
`http://localhost:4000`.

When jekyll builds the site, it puts the generated files into a
<code>_site</code> directory.  You don't want this directory in Git repository,
so in the <code>.gitignore</code> file add <code>_site</code> to the bottom so
that it'll be ignored.

<pre class="terminal"><code>$ echo "_site" >> .gitignore</code></pre>

At this stage you should have fully working local Jekyll server engine. Now
login to Github and create a new repository with the same name as
<code>yourgithubusername.github.com</code>. If this is your first repository in
the Github, it will lead you to a process of how to configure your local
machine, i.e, setting ssh key and global configurations. It won't take a minute.

Then from your local machine.

<pre class="terminal"><code>$ cd yourgithubusername.github.com
$ git init
$ git add .
$ git commit -m "Initial commit. Jekyll base setup."</code></pre>

Then follow Github's instructions on adding the remote reference, which is along
the lines of (substitute username),

<pre class="terminal"><code>$ git remote add origin
git@github.com:username/username.github.com.git $ git push -u origin
master</code></pre>

This pushes your initial site to the Github. It can take up to 10 minutes for
new sites to be generated when they are first pushed. They will email you when
it's done.

Moreover, after these steps whenever you make new changes or write a new blog
post, you have only to do,

<pre class="terminal"><code>$ git commit -am "Wrote another awesome blog!"
$ git push origin</code></pre>

Now you are able to visit your static site from
`http://yourgithubusername.github.com`

<!--
Custom Domains
--------------

One nice thing about Github Pages is that you can add your own domain name for
your site other than using <code>yourgithubusername.github.com</code>. Create a
file with name CNAME in your site folder and put domain name of your liking, for
instance, CNAME for this site is <code>morazow.me</code>.

<pre class="terminal"><code>$ cd yourgithubusername.github.com
$ touch CNAME
$ echo "morazow.me" > CNAME</code></pre>

After adding that file, you will need to modify your DNS settings by adding an A
record that points to 207.97.227.245.
-->

Further Steps
--------------

From now on you can modify your site using HTML/CSS (I do not speak this
language.) with full control over the blogging engine. Create themes of your
liking, modify color, text, etc.  For inspiration visit the
[Sites](https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll/wiki/sites) created by [Github
Pages](http://pages.github.com). I have cloned the [Tom
Preston-Werner's](http://github.com/mojombo/mojombo.github.com) site and,
currently I am happy with it. Maybe I will learn some html/css while making the
changes to the site.

References
----------

* [Jekyll Wiki](https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll/wiki/) - Covers more features
  and configuration options for Jekyll.
* [GitHub Pages](http://pages.github.com/) - An explanation on how to setup your
  personal GitHub page as well as how to setup pages for your projects.
* [YAML Front Matter][frontmatter] - Metadata for files that will be processed
  by Jekyll.
* [Liquid Templating Language](http://www.liquidmarkup.org/) - The Ruby
  templating engine used by Jekyll.
* [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/) - For simply editing
  posts.

[tompreston]: http://tom.preston-werner.com/2008/11/17/blogging-like-a-hacker.html
[davidwinter]: https://davidwinter.me/setting-up-github-pages/
[frontmatter]: https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll/wiki/yaml-front-matter
